(2) Master C# async/await with Concurrency Like a Senior - YouTube

Transcripts:
(00:00) Are you looking for a comprehensive explanation of concurrency including key concepts like multi-threading, reactive programming, asynchronous and parallel programming with a deep dive into async keywords? Then welcome. I'm going to explain everything you need to master concurrency in my YouTube channel and it is going to be the first tutorial that will start your journey.
(00:23)  Before we get started, one quick thing. Don't forget to subscribe my channel. If you like my videos, hit the like button and share if possible. Now let's rock and roll. Before diving into details, let's check what we have in our agenda. We are going to talk a lot about concurrency. We are going to learn the types of concurrency like multistrading, parallel programming, asynchronous programming and reactive programming.
(00:49)  At the end you will understand what is multi-reading, what is parallel programming, what is a asynchronous programming and the differences between these concurrent types and at the end I am going to explain async keyword usage in C# but not just usage but also the behind operations including async state mashing in C. We are going to talk a lot of interesting stuff. Stay tuned.
(01:16)  As I mentioned before, everything is really easy to understand if you have a good mentor to explain it. Okay, let's learn about concurrency. Concurrency is doing more than one work at a given time. Do one thing while the system is working on another thing. It is crucial for improving responsiveness and performance in modern applications especially those dealing with input output bound operations or user interactions.
(01:44)  This really easy topic. So this is our diagram. In our diagram we have a user and user have has two requests. The first one is going to be the database request. The other one for external service. So for the first request when user requests to database uh we have some type of operations behind the scenes.
(02:06)  We are doing for example bulk insert to the database. Meanwhile it is possible for our user to request to the external service. The long story short while finishing the first request it should be possible for us to respond the second request. This is another diagram. In this diagram we have two operations including upload to server and get from the database.
(02:29)  Uh while uploading to the server it is possible for us to get data from the database. Actually we are doing more than one work at the given time. That is actually what we are calling concurrency. Well, let's talk about the implementation forms of concurrency. But before that, I want you to understand that concurrency is a general concept.
(02:53) It means it is possible inn net to implement concurrency using multiple ways like multi-threading, asynchronous programming, reactive programming. So the concurrency you can compare it like uh architectural style. You have architectural style in a high level and it is possible for us to implement given architectural style using more than one ways.
(03:18)  So inn net we have more than one way of implementing concurrency and one of them is actually going to be our multi-threading. What is mult threading? Multi- threading is a type of concurrency and it is a specific approach used to achieve concurrency within a program. In software development, mouth sorting is a technique that allows multiple parts of a program to execute concurrently within a single process.
(03:39) In modern software development, we're using thread pool to enable multi-threading. Actually, you can use thread as a class in your application. But when you have a thread as a class in your application, it indicates that you are dealing with a legacy code. So, don't use thread instead use thread pools.
(04:00)  And uh multi-threading is equal to multiple threads within a single process. We often use multi-using for CPUbound tasks or parallel processing. Remember that parallel processing is equal to parallel programming. The parallel programming is a type of multi-threading. We'll talk about it. And multi-using allows multiple threads to share a single CPU and execute one after another creating the illusion of simultaneous execution.
(04:29)  So in general we have multis rating and it is a type of concurrency. Let's talk in detail about the multis rating. When you create a console application, Windows forms WPF application doesn't matter. You will have one process and by default you will have a thread called main thread whatever you can call it. So what is a thread? Thread is a single sequential flow of control. Okay.
(04:56)  So in our process we have one single thread. But when we want to deal with simultaneous operations, when we have multiple operations and we want to run them simultaneously, we are going to create multiple threads. So we have one main thread and multiple worker threads. Let's talk about the old school implementation of multi-threading.
(05:20)  In old school, we have one CPU with one core. Okay? And if we want to run more than one worker thread at the same time in one core CPU actually from the physical perspective it is not possible. Uh but in CPU it is possible for us to do more than million works in a given time trillion even works. So uh the CPU will somehow create a simultaneous operation.
(05:53)  From the user perspective, it will look like the exact simultaneous operation. But from the CPU perspective, there is no simultaneous operation in one core because when you have more than one thread, uh we we are dealing with um time slicing and we are dealing with context switching between the threads. We'll talk about mult threading in more detail in our another tutorials but for now the brief information is enough for us to understand mult trading.
(06:19)  Actually I'm not going to explain multiple coursees because uh after that we'll have a parallel um processing explanation and in this case we'll talk about the multiple cores but for multi- threading it doesn't matter if you have one core or 10 cores in your CPU when you have um more worker threads than your cores then you will deal the false simultaneous it is actually um from the user perspective as I mentioned is simultaneous operation but from the CPU perspective it is not a true simultaneous operation okay now it
(06:56) is time to talk about parallel processing parallel processing is actually parallel programming it is a type of multi- threading use it to achieve real parallelism as we mentioned before in multi-threading we have the fake parallelism but using parallel processing it is possible for us to achieve real parallelism okay we can think about the parallel processing like updated repeated version of multi-using.
(07:19) Actually you can call parallel processing a type of multising. Not just type of multis threading but uh some implementation of multi reading. Okay. The parallel processing is a specific type of multis rating that focuses on achieving true parallelism by utilizing multiple CPU cores and multiple tasks at the same time on different CPU cores equal to parallel processing.
(07:46)  So we have this type of diagram. we have concurrency. The type of concurrency is going to be our multis reading. And the type of multis reading is going to be our parallel processing. And we have another diagram like in our multid environment. We talked about the old school snapshot. Now we have modern snapshot.
(08:06)  In our application, we have again multiple threads, one main thread and multiple worker threads. And in our CPU, we have multiple cores. Now we have four cores. And I have four worker threads. Now it is possible for me to assign a worker thread, one worker thread to one core. Now you have four cores and four worker threads, you will gain a true parallelism in this case.
(08:33) But how about when we have more than um four threads in this case? We have four cores and we have six worker threads. In this case, system will try to parallelize things and we'll try to assign other threads to the cores. In this case, for example, core one and core two, we have one worker thread. They have true parallelism.
(08:59)  For core three and four, we have two worker threads. Okay? And in this case, per core like core three and four, we have fake parallelism. we have context switching between these threads that actually we have again multi threading in this case. So the parallel processing is just a form of trying to use all possible cores in our CPU to make the syncs a true parallelism.
(09:35) Why it's time to talk about asynchronous programming. Asynchronous program is a type of concurrency that uses promise, future or call backs. We have task and task result as a future types. And actually in asynchronous programming we have asynchronous operation. What actually asynchronous operation is? Asynchronous operation is an operation now underway compilation expected shortly.
(10:01)  So you have some type of operation running operation and you are waiting the response from this operation in near future. It is actually a ongoing operation. In general, we have asynchronous code using delegates, events and futures. We are using asynchronous programming for input output bound operations. So we have two type of operations in general.
(10:26) We have CPUbound operations. We have input output bound operations. We are using multi reading and parallel programming for CPUbound operations. We are using um asynchronous programming for input output bound operations. So we have network based queries we have datab working with database working with files all these operations in general are input output bound operations and we are dealing with them using asynchronous programming.
(10:58) So we have different forms of implementations of asynchronous programming. We have in old school inn net one we have asynchronous programming model using delegates. In net 2 we have even based asynchronous pattern eavo but in another tutorial. And we have async await and new task parallel library that helps us to deal with asynchronous programming.
(11:27) So in general what is asynchronous programming? Let's say you have some type of application and we have a main thread and in this main thread I am requesting to a database or to external service. It doesn't matter. So the purpose here is I don't want to block my thread in the server applications like ASP.
(11:53) NET core applications. I don't want to block my request thread for the UI applications. I don't want to block my main thread. It is called UI thread in um Windows forms or WPF. So you don't want to block your thread, you want to gain responsiveness, scalability and it is possible to do it using asynchronous programming in our case and one of them is actually going to be using async await keywords in asynchronous programming.
(12:36)  So in general we have this type of scenario we have concurrency and now for now we have two types of concurrency multi-reading asynchronous programming actually the reactive programming is also another type of concurrency it is possible to implement reactive programming using concurrency but this is not a 100% requirement but anyway and we have a type of multi-threading called parallel processing okay but How about reactive programming? Reactive programming is also a type a form of concurrency but that it is using asynchronous events. So
(13:13) in asynchronous programming we are using asynchronous operations. Okay we have callbacks future promises they are together calling asynchronous operations. But in reactive programming we have asynchronous events. It doesn't always have a definite beginning might occur at irregular intervals and might happen multiple times.
(13:39)  This is uh how the reactive programming is working. So in general we have an application and we have some type of events that we need to react. It is possible to use reactive programming without multitasking. So you can include reactive programming to type of concurrency or you can exclude it. But in general it is possible to implement reactive programming using concurrence.
(14:02)  For that reason we are including the uh reactive programming to a type of concurrency and at the end we have this type of scenario. We have two implementation ways of concurrency. Multi-threading that we are using for CPUbound operations and parallel processing. We have asynchronous programming. We are using them for input output bound operations.
(14:27)  And we have reactive programming. We are reacting to a lot of events in our application. And we have a subset. We have a type of multi-reading called parallel processing that helps us to parallelize to use uh all the possible CPU cores in our application in our system to help us to gain true parallelism. Well, it is time to explain async in practice.
(15:00)  I've created this simple console application for you. The purpose here is provide really easy example first to the compile and get the real async state mashing from that and the second one is really easily understand async await for that reason I haven't provided the real world examples but after understanding this topic you can easily create a real world example and the compile and try to investigate I have really simple two operations here the one the first One is sum that sums to numbers and the calculate that calls sum and prints message some messages
(15:40) using console rate line. So they are actually synchronous operations. Our main thread will be blocked by the calculate and calculate will be blocked by the sum. So we have in general this type of structure for the calculate functionality version one. We have calculate and sum. They are blocking operations.
(16:03)  Main thread blocked by calculate. Calculate blocked by sum. And uh when we retrieve whole information from calculate uh the main thread will continue working. This really easy. Let's just run and see what we are getting at the end. So we have synchronous flow. First will print operation started. Then uh sum is running actually and the third message is going to be the result is blah blah and the fourth one is operation finish it in thread one.
(16:36)  So we have one single thread that handles all these two operations. This is really easy. So let's switch to the second version of this operation. Well in our version two I have a slightly different implementation. For the version two, I have the same console write messages but now I'm not calling the sum method directly.
(16:58)  I am encapsulating it to the task and using task factory str new I am running this task and ging the instance of this task and from the task I'm getting the task a waiter and for the task a waiter I am calling uncompleted that will notify our main thread our main console thread after the operation done. So we are encapsulating our sum.
(17:20) We are not going to run sum in our main thread. Instead we are encapsulating it to another task and running it. That's all. And our main thread is free to continue to work. It means when we print operation started, it will be possible to us to print operation continues after this message instead of seeing it at the end like typed in our calculate version two.
(17:54)  Let's run our calculate version two and see what happens. In my case, it should print first operation started and then operation continues. Why this uh because our some method encapsulated to another task and run in a separate manner. It we are not running it in our main thread. We'll talk about uh how a synchronous operation runs.
(18:16)  But for now it is enough to understand that we are not running it in our main thread and for that reason our main thread is free. So we are easily moving to operation continues and we are providing a delegate. We are providing a delegate to uncompleted method and some executes and after that that when operation is done we are getting notification like operation finishes in thread 7.
(18:39)  So we have different thread for this task and the main thread with number thread ID. We'll talk about why we are getting this type of different threads. Actually um this is going to be our asynchronous operation. But in this case we have a little bit problems to write it because every time when we write our asynchronous operation we need to somehow to wrap it task we call task a waiter on completed.
(19:07)  This is really annoying. So using async await actually we are planning to implement it in version three. It should be possible for us to create asynchronous code like in our synchronous code. Let me just copy our synchronous version of calculate. Okay, I will show you how it is easy for us to convert our synchronous operation to asynchronous operation. Okay.
(19:39)  So let's call it calculate version three. Instead of calling sum, I am going to implement asynchronous version of this sum. So let's call it async. Sum async. And for the sum async, what I'm going actually to do is task delay and time span from milliseconds 10. That's all. uh that's actually uh is a simulation of asynchronous operation.
(20:12) If you want to simulate asynchronous operation, you can easily call the task delay. Task delay is our awaitable operation. For that reason, I am calling await here as your guest system automatically generates async keyword. Let's call Ctrl A DK and uh let's format it and after that so we have async await keywords but we have some issues here.
(20:39)  The problem here is when you await uh your method uh in your signature you should provide async and if you return some value the returned value should be wrapped to task. So it should be task decimal. So you may ask why we are uh wrapping our decimal return value to a task but we are returning the exact decimal here.
(21:06)  The problem here is the async await will be converted to async state mashion and in this state machine the rest of code after await is going to be our continuation task. For that reason, this is actually wet to task and we are returning task decimal rather than decimal. Okay, we have some type of simulation here.
(21:31)  You can actually call any awaitable signature method in this case. Uh but to simulate it, I'm using test delay. And to call some async, what I'm going to do, I'm calling some async with a waitable keyword of course. And I need to modify my calculate to have async keyword with task actually async task or async void.
(22:01)  Which one to use for event based cases for events? Use async void. I will show you one example in our further videos. But for now just understand that in approximately most cases we are using async task such type of library based implementation your uh custom implementations use async task but for the event based things like in WPF like in Windows forms for the asynchronous events you should use async void.
(22:34)  M cool. Now we have asynchronous method. So we converted our calculate to calculate version three and version three is really asynchronous operation. So what is the differences between calculate and calculate version three from the signature perspective? They are 90% similar. So we have we are avoiding this void.
(22:57)  We are using async task and we are just using a weight instead of just synchronous code. That's really easy. The purpose of a async await was first to make to create asynchronous code like a synchronous one. There is no need to create thread tasks to do some type of wrappings over your synchronous code.
(23:23)  So it should be really easy for us to create asynchronous operations like synchronous ones. And the other um one is the asynchronous code helps us to make a responsive application especially for the UI based applications. Our main thread is free to serve another requests and uh from the scalability perspective it is really easy to scale uh these type of applications.
(23:54)  Now we have calculate version three and some asynchronously and that's all that's the real implementation behind the async await but let's try to understand how behind the scenes async await is working. Okay. Now let's run our calculate version three. Our calculate version three is actually asynchronous operation. For the main we need to add async await keywords and for the void let's replace it to task and let's run our application.
(24:27) So cool now we have operation started sum is running in thread 10 the result and operation finishes in thread 10. So we have our operation starts in our main thread and somehow then we are handling this operation in another thread. How actually using async state mashing that we are going to talk about now let's see in our calculate version three we have a weight keyword.
(24:57)  Okay in our main thread we also have a weight keyword. Now let's decompile it and see how the things will be visible from the pig perspective. So I have peak application here. Actually it is really cool tool to the compile our application. Let's just open folder and let's go to bin debug.net net and let's open our async demo exit file and let's go for the code program CS and let's go for first calculate and calculate version two for the calculate and calculate version two I have string information for that reason it is using default interpolated string handler it
(25:43) doesn't matter for us so we have approximately same code in our calculate and calculate version two But we are observing a different type of implementation in our methods where we have a weight keyword. So for the calculate version three, we have a weight. For the main, we have a weight. Let's go for the calculate.
(26:10)  For the calculate version three, I have some type of state mashing builder. Wow, really complex stuff from the first glance. Okay. So let's go for the main method implementation and see if it is applicable for main also. Oh yeah, it means we have um state mashing generation where we are using the await keyword. Okay, let's dive into details and try to understand what happens behind the scenes when you create async await keyword in your application.
(26:47)  When you're using asynchronous programming using async async await actually when you await your code it is automatically generates asynchronous state mashion. This asynchronous state mashion actually cancels from a builder. Let me show you. So we are instantiated. So we have calculate version D_3. It is actually our async state machine.
(27:11) In uh old net versions when you compile your code you will rely that you have direct async state machine instantiation here but in our case in net core latest version I'm using net 8 in this case I have async state mashion as an attribute and we have some type of class here and we are instantiating our state mashion for the state machine I have a builder state machine is a class it has a builder property Okay, we are creating async task method builder create.
(27:46)  Using this create we are uh setting the value for the builder. We are providing first number second number and our state machines first state is going to be minus one. It is really important and for the builder we have start we are starting this builder. Okay. And this builder accept state machine as a reference value.
(28:10)  It means our state machine knows about the builder and builder knows about state machines. So we have birectional communication between these uh elements. So in general uh async await behind the scenes uses two design patterns two general design patterns state mashing pattern and state pattern and actually the builder design pattern and let's see what happens when uh we call builders start we have async implementation I async state machine let's check we have I async state machine implement mentation.
(28:54)  This is our compiler generated class. As you remember calculate version 3d minus minus3 it implements a async state machine and this async state machine we have move next method. Actually when we call builder start it will automatically call our move next and this move next in our state by default we have minus one. Okay.
(29:22)  And we are checking if the num one this is a generated name it doesn't matter for us. If the first state is not equal to zero in our case it is not equal to zero it is minus one then system is going to do some operations with a waiter get a waiter. Okay we are awaiting response from some async method. Okay. And the important thing here is we are calling is completed.
(29:54)  If it is completed, it has a different flow. If it it hasn't been completed yet, it has a different flow. Otherwise, it has completely different flow. It means when a waiter is not completed, we are going to call move next again. This await unsafe uncompleted will call our move next again with setting it is state to zero that in the second time it is going to check if it is equal to zero.
(30:29) Yes. Then it will switch to continue the furthest stuff here like uh including else and the furthest stuff here. Okay. And I'm going just to copy this functionality from here and implement it in our C# code. Okay, I have copied the source code from the peak from the ill viewer here to my console application and did a little bit refactoring.
(30:59) Actually, I name it the wrong classes, the wrong field names. Now we have properly working application. Let's run this application and see everything is working properly. And what we have now we have actually our async methods with async state mash attribute. We have calculate version three. We have some async for them.
(31:24)  I created for example some async. I created some async state machine. For the calculate version three I renamed it to calculate version three state mashion. Uh in all.net Net they are using async state mashing class instance but inn net core uh we have automatically generated async state machine attribute with the proper type. Let's go for our type.
(31:48)  All our state machine class types inherit from async state mash. This is our main interface to implement state mashion for async await. It has move next and set state mashing methods. Actually when as you realized for all type of our async methods that call a weight keyword in it we have approximately same calling structure same method structure.
(32:17)  Let's take for example our calculate version three. In our calculate version 3 we are instantiating the instance of state machine. For the state machine we are uh creating a builder. Actually state machine has a builder property and the builder already knows about state m machine. As I mentioned we have birectional communication between state machine and builder.
(32:45)  We have first and second numbers in our state machine. Actually it is code generated. So automatically it is uh creating the first number and second number properties fields in our state machine. And we have this is really important. We have state by default minus one. Okay. And when the builder starts it actually calls our async state machines move next method.
(33:14)  Let's go for the move next method. In our move next the builder start will call our move next. Okay. In our move next we have some type of logic we are calling our sum async okay with a waiter and we have special checking here and if the awaiter isn't completed we will call the move next for the second time.
(33:42)  This is really important to understand that when our move next starts first time it starts with default uh value equal to minus1. This is our minus one. And in our if we have number one equal to minus1. So the for the first call uh we will go to this part of if and we will try to get a waiter from our sum async to check if a waiter is completed or not.
(34:17)  If is not completed, we are going to call move next for the second time but with state equal to zero. This is really important for the second time move next will not uh go to this if instead it will run else and the rest of stuff written here. So let's check. I'm just putting the break point here. Let's put break point to our try.
(34:46) Okay. So in my code in calculate let's go to main our main we have main state machine. Okay. We are debugging our main state machine. We have approximately same structure for all waiters. So there is uh no big difference between these state machions which one to debug. For now I'm debugging my uh main state machine.
(35:13)  For the main state machine we should see the minus one by default here and uh for the second time it should be zero and it should be called twice because when we let's go to our main method here in our main method using the builders start we are running the move next for the first time and in move next itself we have await unsafe on completed that will call this move next for the second time but with state equal to zero. Okay.
(35:56)  So let's go to our application. Let's run it. So in my num one I have minus one. This is the first time to call our move next. Okay. Uh let's debug it. Let's continue. So uh we are entering to this if we are getting the calculate checking if a waiter is not completed. It is not completed the state is equal to zero. Okay.
(36:25)  And using await unsafe on complete when I click continue you see we are calling the move next for the second time with num one equal to zero. that will jump to else and for the further operations here that's how actually internally async await works actually there are some type of few differences between async await in console in WPF in ASP.
(36:58) NET net core applications. We'll talk about them but for now we are trying to understand internally how async await works. So in general async aait generates async state mashing behind the scenes and it uses state and builder design pattern in this case and using this move next for the second time for the await unsave on completed it will call it in another thread.
(37:33)  That's why for the first time let's check it for the first time when we run our main application here our main state machine all these instructions like for example let's go to the original source code to explain it when we call our calculate version 3 asynchronous operation this will be run synchronously and actually in our main thread until it reach to a wait keyword.
(38:04)  This is really important. And the syncs after a wait is going to be a task uh task continuation and will be run will be visible in another thread will be catched by another thread actually. So uh let's try to run our application again and let's call the calculate version three to check if everything is working properly. We are starting in thread one.
(38:32)  This is our main thread. We are running some in thread 11. Actually in thread 11 we are catching this information and for the operation finish it we are catching it for the thread 11. Why? Because we have let's see what we have here in our await compilation. We have two types of move next calling. The first move next calling uh will be happen in our main thread in our original thread and the second call the await unsafe uncompleted the previous versions of net it was just it's on complete I guess yeah it was await uncompleted but now it is await unsafe
(39:20) uncompleted yes and we have simple check here it is also important If your awaitable operation is already completed then there will not be another thread. Uh in this case let's go to our calculate version three original application. What I am actually going to do I am going to return task dot from result.
(39:53)  It means the operation is already done here. Uh let's await it and let's try to run and check if we have another uh thread ID indication here. Let's see. You see we are running calculate version three but all the operations are catched by the main thread. In this case, actually as I mentioned before, there is no thread in asynchronous operation.
(40:26)  I will talk the about this in our next lesson. But for now, just remember that when you are having awaitable operation that is already done, this will not call the next move next operation and it is not going to move your rest of operation. in the rest of the syncs after a wait to the next uh thread environment. Let's say so we mentioned that there is no thread in asynchronous operations but let's try to understand what happens behind the scenes.
(41:04)  We have main thread that starts the asynchronous operation by calling awaitable keyword. So we are using for example in calculate version three we are calling the await for some async. It doesn't wait for the operation to complete. Our main thread doesn't wait for the operation to complete. Instead, it suspend execution at the await keyword and returns control to the runtime.
(41:31)  So, we have between us and operation system. We have a runtime. Okay. The the operation system is primarily responsible for monitoring and handling the asynchronous operations progress. It notify the runtime when the operation completes. So we are doing this type of asynchronous operations in operation system level. Okay.
(41:55)  In general and operation system monitors and handles all the things related to asynchronous operations and notifies our runtime. When the operation finished the runtime schedules the continuation of async method. So in the first time the main thread uh suspend execution and now after receiving response from the operating system the runtime schedules the continuation of async method and this continuation can execute on the main thread or a thread thread.
(42:29)  So depending from the console application WPF ASP.NET net or your um Windows form applications. Uh we have uh the continuation in our main or the thread post thread and also it is possible for us to configure it. So that's actually all what happens behind the scenes of async await keyword.
